IP version 6 or link local addresses or unique cost addresses but restricted to the local link hence
the name link local.
There are still hundred twenty eight bits and length the interface identifies automatically configured
with the EU IP address Notah ever that the most significant 10 bits of the address start with 80 in
hexadecimal or seven binary ones followed by binary zero followed by binary one followed by binary zero
in binary routing protocols use link local addresses to advertise routes to one another and an IP version
6 at a node having a global unicast address on a local link will use the link local address of its default
IPV six router rather than the global unicast address.
This is good because if the network is renumbered the default router can still be used using the linked
local address link local addresses won't change when you renumber your global unicast addresses.
Site local addresses.
Also another type of unicast address but have a limited scope to a site site local addresses are not
enabled by default on nodes unlike link local addresses which are automatically enabled.
In other words you have to configure site local addresses.
The address starts with C Zira with the most significant 10 bits set in binary to 7 binary ones followed
by binary zero followed by two binary ones.
So the most significant 10 bits of a site local address always start with this value so that local addresses
are the IP version 6 equivalent of or FC 19:18 addresses.
These however have been deprecated and should no longer be used.
But the idea was that you could have many many subnets within your organization as you would now have
54 bits for subsetting which is far greater than the 16 beds that you get with global unicast addresses.
The next type of address is an IP for compatible IP D6 address in this address.
The most significant 96 bits are set to 0 and the least significant 32 bits are set to the IP version
for address.
This is a special unit cost RPV 6 address uses a transition mechanism on hosts and routers to automatically
create IPV for tunnel's to deliver IPV six packets over IPV four networks.
This mechanism allowed for the automatic establishment of an IP B-6 over IPV for tunnel between two
nodes over and RPV for infrastructure using the IP version for destination address inside the destination
IP V-6 address.
So the format of the address would be as follows.
The most significant 96 bits would be set to zero.
The least significant 32 bits would be set to the decimal representation of the IP version for address
that could be rewritten as follows.
So colon colon 1 9 2 0 to 100 the decimal Ickey version for address could also be written as a hexadecimal
value.
So this would be the same address for example 190 in decimal is equal to zero in hexadecimal.
Notice 1 2 equates to see.
So once again it's used to represent the addresses of IP version 4 nodes as IP version 6 addresses.
Please note that this address format has been deprecated in favor of other more enhanced transmission
mechanisms such as dynamic net Peetie or net protocol translation.
It's also important to point out that the IPV for comparable IPV six addresses use a slash 96 mosque.
So 96 boats are set to zero.
The mosque is Flesch 96 the least significant 32 bits are set to the IP version for address either in
dotted decimal notation such as your or a hexadecimal representation of the address like in this example.
As I've already mentioned unspecified addresses is where the address is set to zeros and it's used as
a placeholder when no address is available.
So during an initial DHP request or duplicate address detection loopback addresses are set to zeros
and Lawsie or 1.
This is equivalent to 127 0 0 1 an IP version 4 and as used by the host to identify itself.
I've already demonstrated this and can be used to check that the IP V-6 protocol stack is functioning
properly.
So in summary IPV 6 unique cost addresses can be broken up into six types.
The first type is unspecified.
So colon colon slash 128 then loop back colon colon one slash 128 and then we have aggregate all global
unicast addresses and yes some examples of ranges these Remember globally unique There's no need for
net because you have global reachability that addresses unique globally.
Then we have linked local addresses which address is used only on the local link used for example by
writing protocols starts with 80 in hexadecimal site local addresses or similar in concept to RAFC 19:18
private addresses.
They start with F E C.
IPV for compatible addresses.
The most significant 96 bits are set to zero and that's allowed us to create automatic tunneling of
IPV six of the IPV for both site local and IPV for comparable addresses have been deprecated now multicast
addresses are broken up into two parts.
If if the 00 slash 8 or assigned multi-course addresses and then you have solicited node multi-course
addresses for each unique cost and any cost address configured on an interface of a node or router a
corresponding solicited node multicast address is automatically enabled the solicited node multicast
address is scoped to the local link.
This is an example is used for the replacement of up an IP version 4.
If you remember up uses broadcasts but broadcasts are no longer supported in IP version 6 so the solicited
node multicast address is used by nodes and Rod has to learn the linked layer addresses of Navan nodes
and routers on the same link.
So very similar concept to up but we are not using broadcasts we are using multicast duplicate address
detection or dead can be used by a node to verify whether an IP V-6 address is already in use on its
local link.
Before using that address to configure its own IP V-6 address with stateless order configuration
stateless order configuration is a new function enabled by IP version 6 by having a much larger address
space IP version 6 is designed to enable order configuration of IP addresses on devices while keeping
those addresses unique.
This enables basic Servilius configuration of nodes as well as easy renumbering routers same periodic
router advertisements using a link local address.
I wouldn't try and remember these addresses but the address used would be this.
But the source address used would be this going to a multicast address of if have zero to Colan column
one.
In other words all nodes on the link the router uses ICMP version 6 type 1:34 which is known as a router
advertisement telling notes information like what prefix to use what the default gateway is and a lifetime
of this prefix that's advertised to them the advertisement period can vary and you can also change the
lifetime of the prefix advertised to hosts when a host initially boots up the node will need its IP
address.
As soon as possible.
And normally in the early stages of the boot process it could wait for a long period of time for the
next router advertisement to get the information it needs to configure its interfaces and thus a node
will say I wrote a solicitation message to routers on the network asking them to reply immediately with
Erato advertisement so that the node can immediately order configure its IP address so the host will
send a solicitation to all writers using the all Rajiv's multi-course multicast address.
It is zero to Colon colon to the host uses ICMP version 6 type 1:33.
Again I wouldn't try and remember all of these ICMP types just understand the process.
The host uses it to link local address as the source of the Rodda solicitation request.
So Jesus if he followed by its address as the source and the message goes to destination of faith Syria
to call Anchal and to all rodders on the local link.
Harada will reply to that message.
Using ICMP version 6 type 1 3 4 the Radu will use its linked local address of if he A-T and EU.
As the source and the destination will go to if it's 0 2 colorant column 1.
In other words all notes on the link sawder configuration has the advantage in that enables plug and
play configuration of IPV six devices.
You just configure an IP address on the router and by default route advertisements are enabled PCs and
other devices can be plugged into the network and they will automatically learn the prefix assigned
to them and default gateway without the administrator configuring at the HGP server or manually configuring
IP addresses.
Hosts are automatically configured with the prefix received and then they combine that with a link layer
address.
In other words the address to configure a local IP B-6 address to allow them to communicate with the
network.
Another advantage of status or configuration is the renumbering of devices.
A router can just advertise a new prefix and time out the old prefix if required and hosts will automatically
be updated with the new prefix information.
So gone are the days of struggling to reconfigure and renumber the IP addresses of hosts now stateful
DHP still exists in version 6 of DHP.
It provides more control and stateless configuration for example of using Cecka IP phones.
They need to learn an option 150 from a DHP server which tells the phones the TFT server they need to
connect to to download their configuration as well as their firmware.
So DHP in some cases is still required as it gives us more control and more options.
Now that said you can use stateful DHP concurrently with stateless order configuration so you don't
have to make an explicit choice between the two stateful the AGP can also provide IP version 6 addresses
in the absence of routers.
So in this typology there are no routers so DHP server can be configured.
It can also be used for network renumbering in the same way as an IP version 4 and it can be used for
automatic domain name registration of hosts using dynamic DNS.
So a lot of the concepts available in provision for or supply an IP version 6.
Now in this example we have both a router and a DGP server.
Now the process for acquiring configuration data for a DHP version 6 Cline is very similar to IP version
4.
However initially the client will first detect the presence of routers on the linked by using neighbor
discovery messages.
If at least one router is found as in this diagram the client will examine the rod advertisements to
determine if DHP version 6 should be used.
If there are advertisements and able to use of DHP version 6 on the link or if there's no Rodda the
client then starts a DHB solicit phase to find a DHP server.
So in this example the HBP version 6 can be used.
So the host will send a DHP solicit message to DHP version 6 agents.
In other words the AGP servers using multicast address.
If if 0 2 colon colon one colon to once again just remember anything starting with 0 2 is a multicast
address.
We do not have broadcasts in IP version 6.
Send the place of broadcasts we're using specific multicast addresses.
The hosts will use a source address of he.
In other words a link local address.
Now both DHP servers and DHP relays will listen for DHP solicit messages on the multicast address.
So DHP forwarding is very similar in IP version 6 has its own IP version for now if DHP cannot be used
the host reverts to stateless configuration as per the previous examples I've shown you.
Now without further ado let's set up a basic IP version 6 network.
In this example I have route 1 and router to both route is have a foster ethernet interface router one's
network and the first Ethan and interfaces going to be 2001.
Column One column one column one router to use force Ethan subnet is going to be 2001 and one color
one color and three.
The rod is connected by a serial link and the subnet is going to be two thousand and one color and one
color in one color.
Notice once again the subnet mask is always slushed 64 on all subnets OK so an Rato one I'm going to
break out of the initial configuration dialog
going into global config mode and give the Rodda a name and then I'm going to enable IPV sake's unique
cost routing
so that we can run the B-6 on this router and then I'm going to go into to 0 0.
The first Ethan interface and give it an address or IP V-6.
I notice there are a lot of options here.
But I'm going to specify a trace and then I'm going to specify an IP V-6 address so 2001
and in this case I'm going to give the interface an address of one such a simple as that to configure
an IP version 6 address on a router this portion is the network portion and notice we've got colon colon
so there were a bunch of zeros not displayed here and we ending in a one.
And then I can no shut the interface.
And as you can see the interfaces come up.
Not taught do pain 2001.
And ping the IP address and as you can see the ping is successful on the serial zero interface.
I can do the same thing IPV six address 2001
and on this side I'm giving it an address of Colan one.
And on this side I'm going to give an address of code on to some router to do the same thing.
Enable IPV six unique cost routing and then on.
Seriously zero give it an ITV 6 address of 2001
no shut the interface and 0 0 0 given an address
and shut that interface.
So hopefully now from Rodek to you I should be able to ping wrote a one
that doesn't work because I forgot to shut the interface on the side so no shut it.
And go back to route it to.
And let's see if the pings succeeds this time.
The interface came up and as you can see the ping succeeded.
It's as simple as that to configure IP addresses on a Cisco router.
Now on the first ethernet interface I could give it another IP address so I could say RPV six trace.
Let's just be lazy.
They've given an address of 2001 Carlon called on one slash 64.
And as you can see the rod has accepted that address on the road.
I cannot think 2001 Cullen column one.
And as you can see the thing succeeds.
I could go back to the interface and give it an address as follows.
IPV 6 address and it's a 2001 colon to Colon colon.
Notice it gives you the option of link local address but we don't want to do that let's go for Slash
64.
Notice please.
I haven't looked a whole portion on the Sadrist up just specify the network portion.
And now what I can do is I can specify EU y 64 and hit enter.
So we are going to use the Mac address as part of that address.
So now I can type the command show run interface if seriously Ashira to show you the configuration.
And as you can see there's no provision for address configured on this interface.
There are only IP version 6 addresses and they are three IP version 6 addresses that we have manually
configured I couldn't type show interface 0 0 the MAC address of this interface is C 4 0 1 0 F E 8 followed
by four zeros.
So the vendor portion of this address is see 4 0 1 0 F and the unique portion is 8 followed by four
zeros.
So just to display that nicely I'm going to say show interface if 0 0 pipe include a set.
Only shows that MAC address in the output in there it is.
And then I'm going to talk show IPV 6 interface 0 0 and only include the addresses that we configured
and the other three IP addresses we configured on the interface.
So notice here please.
We'll start from the right inside the unique portion of the MAC address is eight followed by four zeros.
There it is in the IP address.
Remember leading zeros can be dropped.
So this zero represents those four zeros.
He ate is the eat of they f f f e has been inserted in the address to make it 64 bits and then notice
the remaining portion is C 4 0 1 0.
If which is represented here as see 6 0 1 if once again leading zeros can be removed.
Notice the zero in front of this f has been removed
see 4 0 1 has been converted to see 6 0 1 because the 7th but has been changed to a one to represent
at this mac addresses globally unique so notice a IP address is derived from the MAC address by using
the UI representation of the MAC address.
Let's talk the command show.
IP The CICS interface.
It's 0 7 0.
And as you'll see here notice there are three globally unique Unicode addresses configured on the interface
notice on this interface.
IPV 6 is enabled and these are linked local address starting with Haiti and the EU portion of the address
if they zero to call on call and 1 represents all nodes and Rod is on the link if it 0 2 colon colon
to represent all rodders on the link.
This is the solicited node multicast address used for mechanisms that replace up in other words.
This is the address used by duplicate address detection or dead.
Is a solicited node multicast address for each unique link ID so solicited node multi-course addresses
consist of f f 0 t colon colon one colon F F and then the unique portion of the interface ID.
So as an example you can see this is 001 which is the same for this address and this address that here.
Notice we have if if 0 2 column called on one colon if if e 8 0 because of this entry here which is
different to the previous addresses.